welcome to starry night software in
these videos we'll be exploring some of
the special events you can view in
starry night in this video we use starry
night to learn more about the current
explosion in solar activity
recently solar flares have featured
prominently in the media news stories
tell us to expect everything from
massive disruptions to navigation power
and communication systems to spectacular
displays of Northern Lights what is this
activity and how does it affect us here
on earth the huge tendrils of gas that
erupted from the Sun or solar
prominences they can reach thousands of
miles above the surface if this material
escapes the Sun completely it's called a
coronal mass ejection or CME
at all other times there is a constant
gentle flow of particles from the Sun
called the solar wind it pushes and
stretches Earth's magnetic field into a
vast comet shaped region called the
magnetosphere
as the solar wind flows past the
magnetosphere it produces millions of
amps of electric current which excites
molecules in the Earth's upper
atmosphere and creates the mysterious
and beautiful aurora or Northern Lights
if a CME encounters the earth the Aurora
flare up becoming brighter and reaching
further from the poles these rural oval
maps show you how far from the poles the
Aurora currently reach and where on
Earth's surface you will be able to see
them
solar flares are massive bursts of
radiation from the sun's surface
blasting radio waves gamma radiation and
x-rays into space flares are classified
according to how much x-ray radiation
they produce the ones that make the news
are m-class flares which can cause radio
interference and blackouts in the polar
regions of the earth and x-class flares
which can result in radiation storms
that cause global power disruptions
if you're on the surface of the earth
the planet's magnetic field protects you
from lethal doses of solar radiation if
you're an astronaut in orbit around the
earth you have very little protection
solar flares are a very real danger to
people and technology outside the
protection of Earth's magnetic field as
we've become more dependent on
satellites and sensitive electronics the
potential for disruption has increased
for example a magnetic storm in 1989
caused the collapse of the hydro quebec
power grid resulting in nine hours of
power loss for six million people and
substantial economic damage
solar storms flares and prominences are
associated with the sun's 11-year cycle
of activity the next high point in this
cycle called solar maximum is predicted
for early 2013 so for the next couple of
years things on the Sun are going to
heat up